---
layout: post
title: "Functionality-Focused Code Organization"
---

I spoke yesterday at the 2010 Boston jQuery Conference about
"Functionality-Focused Code Organization." It was a presentation that
summarized a year of thinking about organizing JavaScript applications, and I
think it went fairly well. It was a treat to see so many people nodding in
understanding and agreement out in the audience, and to talk to people
afterwards who have thought about and struggled with these same problems.

- [Slides](http://www.slideshare.net/rmurphey/functionality-basedorg) (Note
  that you can download a PDF there if you'd prefer not to view the slides on
  SlideShare)

I had one person come up to me afterwards who really left an impression -- I
don't recall his name (I am perfectly terrible with names), but what he said
was that he came from a background of developing desktop applications, and that
the concepts I talked about in fact made perfect sense to him. I think this is
important to remember -- the ideas that I talked about aren't new or novel at
all, but really just long-established patterns of developing applications,
adapted to fit in the world of JavaScript and the browser. I don't come from a
CS background at all -- I came to this whole JavaScript thing via HTML and CSS,
with a tiny smattering of programming mixed in -- and so I've arrived at a lot
of this things the hard way. It's gratifying to hear people tell me I've gotten
it right, and if anything, it makes me want to get the word out to all the
people who are in the same shoes as I was not that long ago.

Finally: A big thanks to the jQuery team, and especially Leah Silber, for
putting on the conference. I know it's hard work, and I know there were some
bumps (there always are!), but as a speaker, I feel like I've been treated very
well, which means a lot. Thanks, guys.
